# Lesson 1 -- Linear Equations and Exponential Functions
## Launch
My little sister, Savannah, is three years old.
She has a piggy bank that she wants to fill.
She started with $5$ pennies, and each day when I come home from school,
she is excited when I give her $3$ pennies that are left over from my lunch money.

**Fill in the table below:**

Days ($n$) | Pennies ($f(n)$)
| ---- | ---- |
$0$ | $5$
$1$ | $8$
$2$ | ____________
$3$ | ____________
$4$ | ____________
$5$ | ____________

<details>
  <summary>Hint</summary>
  <p>
    Savannah gets $3$ pennies per day.
  </p>
</details>

**Question:** What is the number of pennies after $6$ days?


**Question:** If Savannah's piggy bank holds **26** pennies, how many days will it take to fill? ____________ days.


We can write an equation to describe the relationship between $n$ and f$(n) $  
**$f(n)$ $=$ 3n $+$ 5**  

The equation above can be described as a **function**.  
We can find the **output** of the function *given an **input** $n$*. If the input is 3, then we could write the output as $f(3)$.
What would the numerical output of $f(3)$ be?
We could find *f*(3) easily by replacing every _n_ in our formula with 3.
So, *f*(3) $=$ 3$($3$)$ $+$ 5 or **14**.

We have seen **14** before. In the table, when days was 3, pennies was 14.  
From here on out, we will refer to days as **n** and pennies as ***f*(*n*)**.

The process of finding the numerical output given an input is called **evaluating** a function.

**Question:** What is $f(5)$?

**Extend**: Evaluate $f$(10).

### Practice
Use the function definition below to answer questions 1 - 4.  
$f(x)$ = 2x -- 4

1. Evaluate $f(6)$
2. Evaluate $f(2)$
3. Evaluate $f(5)$
4. Evaluate $f(y)$
> *Hint: Replace the $x$'s with $y$'s in the function definition*


## Explore
Our family has a small pool for relaxing in the summer that holds 1,500 gallons of water. 
I decided to fill the pool for the summer. 
I was getting bored just standing there watching water flow and began to think about a mathematical model 
for the time it takes to fill the pool while I was waiting. 
I checked the flow on the hose and found that it was filling the pool at a rate of 2 gallons every minute. 
When I had 5 gallons of water in the pool, I started the timer.

**Fill in the table:**

$t$ minutes | $f$(t) gallons
| :---------: | :------------: |
0 | 5
1 | ____________
2 | ____________
3 | ____________
4 | ____________
**6** | **____**

**Question:** When $t$ is 0, what is $f(t)$?  
This number is called the $y$-intercept.

**Question:** When $t$ changes by 1, what does $f(t)$ change by?  
That number would be the **rate of change**.  



**Question:** Extend the table. Find _f_(10).

Slope-intercept form is a way to describe a line (or a function).
It provides a **point** (the y-intercept) and the **slope** (which can be used to find another point).
It is expressed as **$y=mx+b$** where 
$b$ stands for the $y$-intercept
and $m$ stands for the **slope** or rate of change. 

You can use slope-intercept form to write function
definitions for functions that don't use $x$ and $y$. 
Just replace $y$ with $f(t)$ (or whatever the variable is)
and replace $x$ with $t$ (or whatever the variable is).  

**Question:** Write an equation to describe the relationship between $t$ and $f(t)$.
> *Hint: Write a function definition. You can use slope-intercept form.*

**Question:** Use your function definition to find $f(50)$.

**Question:** How many minutes will it take to fill the pool?  
> Recall: My pool holds $1500$ gallons of water.  

**Extend:** How many *hours* will it take to fill?  
**Think about it:** If I have a pool party in 2 hours, will the pool be full?


### Practice
Use the equation below to answer questions 1--4.  
$g(x) = 8x + 5$  
5. Evaluate *g*(6)
6. Evaluate *g*(0)
7. Evaluate *g*(3$y$)
8. Evaluate *g*(10)

-------

So far, we have only seen **linear** equations (or equations that can be described by a straight line).
Now, we will take a look at **exponential** functions. An exponential function is a function where the
input is processed as the exponent in the equation.

> Example: $f(x) = 4^{x}$

In the example above, the output would be $4$ to the power of an input $x$. 

If we were to make a table of all of the values, it might look like this:  

$x$ | $f(x)$
| ---- | -------- |
0 | 1
1 | $4$
2 | $16$
3 | $64$
4 | $256$

You can see that $f(x)$ gets really large really quickly. This is characteristic of an exponential function.

------

I’m more sophisticated than my little sister, 
so I save my money in a bank account that pays me $3%$ compound interest on the money in the account at the end of each month. 
(If I take my money out before the end of the month, I don’t earn any interest for the month.) 
I started the account with \$50 that I got for my birthday.

**Fill in the table:**  

$m$ months | $f$(m) dollars
| :---------: | :------------: |
0 | $50$
1 | $50 + 0.03(50) = 51.5$
2 | $51.5$ + $0.03$ (\_\_\_\_) = \_\_\_\_
3 | \_\_\_\_
4 | \_\_\_\_
**6** | **____**

**Question:** Evaluate $f(3)$.
> Hint: What is *f*(*m*) when *m* is 3?

**Question:** What is the *rate of change* for this function?
> Extend: Is the rate of change constant?

There is a way to write equations for **exponential** functions such as the one above. 
An exponential function is a function in the form $f(x) = ab^{x} + b$, where *a* is the 
y-intercept and $b$ is the base (so f(1) = ab). 
For example, if we had an equation *f*(*n*) = $2 \cdot 5^{n}$, *f*(4) would be $2 \cdot 5^{4}$ or 1250.


**Question:** Write an equation to describe the relationship between $m$ and *f*(*m*).
> Recall: Remember the form for exponential functions. $f(x) = ab^{x}$.
Hint: 3% means 0.03

**Question:** Use your function definition to evaluate $f(7)$. 

**Question:** Evaluate $f(0)$

### Practice
Use the function definition below to answer questions 1-4.  
$g(t)$ = $4 \cdot 2^{t}$

1. Evaluate *g*(0)
2. Evaluate *g*(2)
3. Evaluate *g*(4)
4. Evaluate *g*(6)


## More Practice
Use the scenario below to answer questions 1-4:  
*Round to the nearest cent*  
**Apples are on sale at the market. $4$ pounds costs $ \&#36; 2.00$.**  
1. How much does $2$ pounds of apples cost?
2. How much does $4$ pounds of apples cost?
3. How much does $0.5$ pounds of apples cost?
4. Write an equation describing the relationship between pounds of apples and cost.

 Use the scenario below to answer questions 5-8:  
 **One dozen eggs costs $ \&#36; 1.98$.**  
 > Remember: 1 dozen eggs means 12 eggs

{:start="5"}
5. How much does 1 egg cost?
6. How much does 5 eggs cost?
7. How much does 5.6 dozen eggs cost?
8. How much does 6 dozen eggs cost?