# Lesson 2: Continuous vs. Discrete Functions

## Looking Ahead (and Behind)
My little sister, Savannah, is three years old.
She has a piggy bank that she wants to fill.
She started with $5$ pennies, and each day when I come home from school,
she is excited when I give her $3$ pennies that are left over from my lunch money.

----
Recall in Lesson 1, we wrote an equation describing this scenario:  
$f(n)$ $=$ 3n $+$ 5

-------
**Question:** What would $f(3.5)$ be?

You will notice that you can give any number, and you will get a **continuous** set of numbers. 
At this point, a definition must be made:  
> A continuous function is a function that has infinitely many values of $f(x)$ between
> $0$ and $10$.

That means that a continuous function would include **all** numbers between 2 points.

The numbers that a function includes (or the $f(x)$ values) are called the **range** and the 
$x$ values are called the **domain**.

In our scenario, the domain would be $\mathbb{R}$ or **all real numbers**.


-------

Recall another problem:

I’m more sophisticated than my little sister, 
so I save my money in a bank account that pays me $3%$ compound interest on the money 
in the account at the end of each month. 
(If I take my money out before the end of the month, I don’t earn any interest for the month.) 
I started the account with \$50 that I got for my birthday.

Notice: We don't get interest if we take our money out before the end of the month

This function is not a continuous function. We will not get a value for $f(3.5)$ because we 
wouldn't get a value. The function is only defined for integer values of months.

We call this a **discrete** function. In this lesson, we will see more examples of continuous 
and discrete functions.

## Launch

The Library of Congress in Washington D.C. is considered the largest library in the world. 
They often receive boxes of books to be added to their collection. 
Since books can be quite heavy, they aren’t shipped in big boxes. 
On average, each box contains $8$ books.

**Review:** Write a function definition describing the relationship between books and boxes.

**Question:** Using your function definition to find the domain of this function.  
